# LODA: Mining Programs for Integer Sequences

LODA is an assembly language, a computational model and a tool for mining integer sequences. You can use it to search programs that calculate integer sequences from the [On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences®](http://oeis.org/) (OEIS®).

The [programs/oeis](programs/oeis) folder contains programs that generate integer sequences from the OEIS. The vast majority of these programs has been automatically generated using the `loda mine` command. Disclaimer: these programs have been validated only for the first terms of the sequences as found in the downloaded version of the OEIS database (currently up to 2000 terms). There is no guarantee that any particular program is correct, i.e., generates the correct (infinite) sequence. You can [search for LODA](https://oeis.org/search?q=LODA&language=english&go=Search) on OEIS to find references to LODA programs.

Here a few selected programs generated by the LODA miners:

* [A000045: Fibonacci numbers](programs/oeis/000/A000045.asm)
* [A020639: Lpf(n): least prime dividing n (when n > 1); a(1) = 1](programs/oeis/020/A020639.asm)
* [A182047: Smallest prime > n*(n+1)](programs/oeis/182/A182047.asm)

Here some examples of a hand-written programs:

* [A000149: a(n) = floor(e^n)](programs/oeis/000/A000149.asm) - written by [Christian Krause](https://github.com/ckrause).
* [A004086: Read n backwards (referred to as R(n) in many sequences)](programs/oeis/004/A004086.asm) - written by [Simon Strandgaard](https://github.com/neoneye).
* [A293810: The truncated kernel function of n](programs/oeis/293/A293810.asm) - written by [Antti Karttunen](https://github.com/karttu).

In total, there are :star: **more than 30k programs available!** :star: You can find lists with descriptions and links here:

* [A000001-A050000](programs/oeis/list0.md), [A050001-A100000](programs/oeis/list1.md), [A100001-A150000](programs/oeis/list2.md), [A150001-A200000](programs/oeis/list3.md), 
* [A200001-A250000](programs/oeis/list4.md), [A250001-A300000](programs/oeis/list5.md), [A300001-A350000](programs/oeis/list6.md), [A350001-A400000](programs/oeis/list7.md)

If you would like to receive updates on the miner findings, you can check the [changes on the master branch](https://github.com/ckrause/loda/commits/master) for new and updated programs or get real-time updates from [@lodaminer](https://twitter.com/lodaminer) on Twitter.

[Contributions are warmly welcome!](CONTRIBUTING.md) You can get in touch by sending a mail to "me" at ckrause dot org.

## Language

The LODA language is an assembly language with focus on arithmetic and number-theoretical operations. It supports an unbounded set of memory cells storing integers, common arithmetic operations, calling other programs, and a loop based on a lexicographical order descent on memory regions. The name "LODA" means
"Lexicographical Order Descent Assembly."

Here is a basic example of a LODA program for computing the Fibonacci numbers:

```asm
; A000045: Fibonacci numbers: F(n) = F(n-1) + F(n-2) with F(0) = 0 and F(1) = 1.

; argument is stored in $0

mov $3,1      ; assign $3 := 1
lpb $0        ; loop as long as $0 decreases
  sub $0,1    ; decrement $0
  mov $2,$1   ; assign $2 := $1
  add $1,$3   ;    add $1 := $1 + $3
  mov $3,$2   ; assign $3 := $2
lpe           ; end of loop

; result is stored in $1
```

To evaluate this program to an integer sequence, you can run:
```bash
./loda eval A000045
0,1,1,2,3,5,8,13,21,34,55,89,144,233,377,610,987,1597,2584,4181
```

The language is not limited to sequences -- it supports an arbitrary number of input and outputs. It is more powerful than primitive recursion (see, e.g., [program for the Ackermann function](programs/general/ackermann.asm)), but termination is nevertheless guaranteed.

For a detailed description of the language features, please take a look the [language documentation](LANGUAGE.md). For more details on the available commands of the `loda` tool, plese see below.

## Tool

The LODA command-line tool is written in C++ and is published under the terms of the Apache License 2.0.

There are currently no binaries available. You need to build it by running `make` in the `src` folder. It has been tested on Linux and MacOS and does not require any external libraries, but only the `wget`, `gzip` command-line tools.

The `loda` command-line tool provides the following commands and options:

```
Usage:                   loda <command> <options>

=== Core commands ===
  evaluate <file>        Evaluate a program to a sequence (see also -t,-b,-s)
  minimize <file>        Minimize a program and print it (see also -t)
  optimize <file>        Optimize a program and print it
  generate               Generate a random program and print it

=== OEIS commands ===
  mine                   Mine programs for OEIS sequences (see also -i)
  match <file>           Match a program to OEIS sequences (see also -i)
  check <seq-id>         Check a program for an OEIS sequence (see also -b)
  maintain               Maintain all programs for OEIS sequences

=== Command-line options ===
  -l <string>            Log level (values:debug,info,warn,error,alert)
  -k <string>            Configuration file (default:loda.json)
  -i <string>            Miner configuration from loda.json
  -t <number>            Number of sequence terms (default:10)
  -c <number>            Maximum number of interpreter cycles (no limit:-1)
  -m <number>            Maximum number of used memory cells (default:100)
  -p <number>            Maximum physical memory in MB (default:1024)
  -b <number>            Print result in b-file format from a given offset
  -s                     Evaluate program to number of execution steps
  -r                     Search for programs of linear sequences (slow)

=== Environment variables ===
LODA_OEIS_PROGRAMS_HOME  Directory for mined programs (default: programs/oeis)
LODA_UPDATE_INTERVAL     Update interval for OEIS metadata in days (default:1)
LODA_MAX_CYCLES          Maximum number of interpreter cycles (same as -c)
LODA_MAX_MEMORY          Maximum number of used memory cells (same as -m)
LODA_MAX_PHYSICAL_MEMORY Maximum physical memory in MB (same as -p)
LODA_SLACK_ALERTS        Enable alerts on Slack (default: false)
LODA_TWEET_ALERTS        Enable alerts on Twitter (default: false)
LODA_INFLUXDB_HOST       InfluxDB host name (URL) for publishing metrics
LODA_INFLUXDB_AUTH       InfluxDB authentication info ('user:password' format)
```

### Core Commands

#### evaluate (eval)

Evaluate a LODA program to an integer sequence. Takes a path to a program (`.asm` file) or the ID an OEIS sequence as argument. For example, run `./loda eval A000045` to generate the first terms of the Fibonacci sequence. Use the option `-t` to set the number of terms to be calculated. Use the option `-b <offset>` to generate it row-by-row in the OEIS b-file format. If you get any exception like `Program did not terminate after ... cycles`, you can use the `-c <cycles>` option to increase the maximum number of execution cycles (steps).

#### optimize (opt)

Optimize a LODA program and print the optimized version. The optimization is based on a static code analysis and does not involve any program evaluation. It is guaranteed to be semantics preserving for the entire integer sequence.

#### minimize (min)

Minimize a LODA program and print the minimized version. The minimization includes an optimization and additionally a brute-force removal of operations based on trial and error. It guarantees that the generated integer sequence is preserved, but only up to the number of terms specified using `-t`. In contrast to optimization, minimization is not guaranteed to be semantics preserving for the entire sequences. In practice, it yields much shorter programs than optimization and we usually apply it with a larger number of terms to increase the probability of correctness.

#### generate (gen)

Generate a random LODA program and print it. Multiple generators are supported and configured in [loda.json](loda.json). The generators use statistics from the existing programs stored. This operation is mainly used for testing the generators and should not be used to generate large amounts of programs.

### OEIS Commands

#### mine

Mine programs for OEIS integer sequences. It generates programs in a loop and tries to match them to sequences. If a match was found, an alert is printed and the program is automatically saved to the [programs/oeis](programs/oeis) folder. The miner configurations are defined in [loda.json](loda.json). Depending on the configuration, programs overwritten if they are faster. This refers to the number of execution steps needed to calculate the sequence. 

LODA is single-threaded and therefore uses one CPU during mining. It supports multiple process instances for parallel mining. You can try the [mine_parallel.sh](mine_parallel.sh) script for this.

You need an Internet connection to access the OEIS database to run this command. Downloaded files are cached in the `$HOME/.loda` folder. You can also configure a Twitter client to get notified when a match was found!

If you found new or better programs for OEIS sequences, please open a pull request to include it!

#### match

Match a program against the OEIS database and add it to LODA. If you manually wrote a LODA program, you can use `loda match -i update <your-program.asm>`
to find matches in tge OEIS and to add it to the LODA programs folders. If you wrote new programs for OEIS sequences, please open a pull request to include it!

#### check

Check if a program for an OEIS sequence is correct. For interactive output, use `-b 1` to enable b-file printing. Use `-c -1` to allow an unlimited number of execution cycles.

#### maintain

Run a maintenance for all programs in the [programs/oeis](programs/oeis) folder. This checks the correctness of all programs in a random order. The programs must generate the first 250 terms of the sequence. In addition, up to the first 2000 terms are taken into account if the program is correct. Incorrect programs are removed and correct programs are minimized (see the `minimize` command). In addition, the description of the sequence in the comment of the program is updated to the latest version of the OEIS database. The program statistics and program lists are regenerated. 

## Related Projects

* [LODA Lab](https://github.com/neoneye/loda-lab) by Simon Strandgaard is an experimental implementation of the LODA language in Rust.
* [jOEIS](https://github.com/archmageirvine/joeis) by Sean A. Irvine and Georg Fischer is a collection of pure Java programs implementing sequences from the OEIS.
* [Sequence Database](http://sequencedb.net) by [Jon Maiga](http://www.jonkagstrom.com/) is a database with machine generated integer and decimal sequences.
* [The Ramanujan Machine](https://github.com/ShaharGottlieb/MasseyRamanujan) by Shahar Gottlieb is an algorithmic approach to discover new mathematical conjectures.
